This paper is testing the hypothesis that labor market trends are largely driven by labor demand rather than labor supply. Per basic economic theory, if a market shift is demand driven, the change in equilibrium quantity (employment) and price (wages) should be postively correlated as the equilibrium point shifts along the market supply curve. If the trend is supply-driven, this correlation should be negative. This paper qualitatively confirmed the hypothesis, but potential theoretical issues described below, plus a time constraint, meant I was unable to quantitatively confirm this apparent finding.

full do.do is a compilation of the three other files, which I broke apart for debugging purposes, then reassembled into this file for the final product so I didn't need a main/make file as I was tinkering with my data sets. I also performed some theoretically simpler processes directly in the full do.do file as this code did not require testing.

To preprocess this data, which was pulled from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Employment and Wage survey, I dropped all data with an ownership code other than 5, meaaning I kept only data pertaining to privately-owned businesses, not owned by international, federal, state, or local governments, as government employers face different incentives from private ones, and these businesses might have distorted my findings. I then dropped all the data which was irrelevant to my paper, leaving me with only the industry code (denoting which industry I was examining), the industry title (the plain-text name of the industry, which was important for later data visualizations), and the month-over-month change in employment and week-over-week changes in wages (the only percent change data BLS provided), my variables of direct interest. I dropped all data with an industry code length other than 3, which I determined to be the appropriate level of granularity for the purposes of this project\*. I determined this because the NAICS coding system is revised annually to account for development of new industries, deprecations of old ones, and overall shifts in the macroeconomy. I consulted with employees at the BLS and they advised me that the 3-digit level was the best balance of stability over time and statistical power. I then destringed the industry codes to help with my final analysis and saved the now-processed data over the raw working file (cached copies of the raw data were stored elsewhere so I could run tests without needing to re-download the data from BLS.

The raw data from BLS was presented in a year-by-year fashion, so I next had to compile the data into a single data set. I did this by using the earliest data available, from 1990, then using a foreach loop to append each subsequent file to the 1990 one. This method resulted in duplication of the data from 1990, and this data suffered from incompleteness anyway, so I dropped the 1990 data to resolve this problem. I then saved this compiled data to a single file.

On the advice of my research supervisor, I then added lagged change in wages and employment, and dummy variables for whether the years were recession years.

Finally, I created a list of all industry codes which I kept in the compiled dataset. I then used a foreach loop to individually regress several different configurations of this data, and outputted them to LaTeX tables.

NB: The LaTeX and PDF files discussed below have been lost to data corrution. Recovery efforts are ongoing. They will be added to this repository and this note removed if they are successfully recovered.

After this, I used LaTeX to count the number of successful regressions and display them as a bar graph. As this project used a large number of low-powered regressions, the individal results were largely meaningless. Rather, the skewness of the sum total of the significance of all the regressions was the meaningful result. As I was running short on time at this point in the project, I left it to optical analysis of the bar graphs, but I intended to use BACE (Bayesian Aggregation of Conventional Estimates) to compile these regression outputs into a quantitative final product.

If I revisit this project, my highest priority will be following through on the BACE analysis to confirm the apparent results from the data visualization. I also hope to take a deeper dive into the availability of industry-level employment and wage data in order to try to find a dataset which uses a more stable industry-coding method, and is therefore more suitable for time-series analysis.

In addition, when I presented this paper to an industrial organization class, Tyler Cowen, the professor teaching the class, pointed out a potential identification issue where the labor market is large and significant enough that Say's Law controls and I would need to theoretically analyse the markets as aggregate supply and aggregate demand rather than single-market supply/demand. I believe I end-ran around this issue by using an aggregation of three-digit level regressions, none of which would be individually large enough to act as aggregate supply/demand. But I would like to do a deeper dive into the literature on such identification problems in order to confirm or disconfirm Dr. Cowen's concern.


\*BLS industry codes use a variable number of digits, where higher-digit codes are more granular than lower-digit codes, and the superior industry codes are strict substrings of subordinate industry codes. So, for example, NAICS code 315 refers to garment manufacturing, while codes 3151, 3152, and 3159 refer to apparel knitting mills, cut-and-sew apparel manufacturing, and apparel accessories and other apparel manufacturing, respectively.
